imagine somebody is asking you questions about your thesis.

what would he ask first?

“what is the subject of your thesis?”

probably. you would of course, respond “A corpus-based approach to the 
language of the papyri. Methodological questions and select topics. is 
the title.”

he would not be satisfied and would answer thus: “sounds nice but what 
exactly are you trying to do in this thesis? what’s the methodological 
questions, and the select topics?”

answer: “The language of the papyri is a subject that has enjoyed some 
attention from scholars in the past but hasn’t been the topic of a major 
study since the early 1980’s. I thought that with our modern tools we 
could essentially take the entire corpus of papyri and generate 
comprehensive and accurate data from that basis. To do that, of course, 
	      I need to develop a methodology, and that’s what the 
	      methodological questions part is about. On the other hand, 
	      I need to demonstrate that my methodology actually works, 
	      so a second part was required; this is select topics, i.e. 
	      two or three specific topics that I treat using my 
	      newly-developed method.”

interesting, he says. and how’re you gonna build that methodology?

“well, the resurgence of computer linguistics is essentially that of 
corpus linguistics. we can now take enormous amounts of text, annotate 
it grammatically in a semi-automatic way and use the data to generate 
statistics that allow us to measure linguistic realities in a very 
accurate way.”

do you have any particular sources of inspiration for this?

“well yes. there are different kinds of corpora. how i would label them 
depends on the detail and scope of the annotation. for example, the most 
basic kind of corpus is simply text - the oldest ones are those. the 
first computational corpus was compiled for English and is called the 
Brown Corpus. it was developed in the sixties. afterwards, others 
followed. a well-known corpus for Greek is the Thesaurus Linguae 
Graecae.

beyond that, corpora can also be annotated grammatically. this can be 
integrated in the actual corpus or done with a supplementary tool. my 
method is based on secondary tools. such a ‘corpus’, though it’s 
technically not designed as one, is the Perseus Project. it’s got loads 
of text and a morphological analyser and lexicon to back it up, plus 
search tools.

some corpora are even syntactically annotated, for example Penn 
University maintains a ‘treebank’, a collection of syntactically 
annotated texts and sentences in English. the interesting thing about 
such 
